Hello and welcome to Chapter Four.
Now, we're going to come back and
visit what I alluded to in the first
chapter of the fourth pattern for code.
Sequential, conditional, iterations,
and then store and reuse.
This is the store and reuse pattern,
and the basic essence of the store and
reuse pattern is that we, as programmers,
do not like repeating ourselves.
So, if you have like four lines of code, and
you want to do the same thing later,
and you put it down here.
And then, you put it later. And what if
you find something wrong with those four
lines of code? Then you've got to
find all the places, and,
let's just say you put it
100 places in your program.
You've got to find all 100 places and
fix the mistake.
So we say well, why don't we put that
one place and give it a name, and
then use it in all the other places?
And that's exactly what store and
reuse is.
It's the idea of don't repeat yourself,
D-R-Y, don't repeat yourself.
So, this is what we've got here,
stored and reused steps.
And functions are those things that
we're storing and reusing.
So, let's take a look.
So the new keyword that we've got is def,
d-e-f, which stands for
start the definition of a function,
define the function.
def is the keyword, it ends in a colon,
just like lots of things that
start an indented block.
That starts an indented block.
You get the name the thing that you're
storing, I call it thing for now, and
there's some some optional parameters,
which we'll see later,
inside parentheses.
Right now, we have no parameters
in this function, and
there is an indented block, and then when
you de-indent that defines the function.
All right, so this thing has
been de-indented, but it also
this t is de-indented and so that is
the definition of the end of the function.
Now, it's key to understand
that as this is parsed or
looked at by Python it
actually doesn't execute.
There's two executable statements there,
print and print.
But all it does is it remembers it.
So it sort of like stores it into a little
area almost like a variable,
right, like a variable x = 2.
Well, there's some x out there and
you put a 2 in it.
Well, there is this thing out there,
t-h-i-n-g.
And there's two lines of code in it.
So it's like a variable
except that it holds code.
Okay, so a function is kind of like
a variable, except that it holds code.
And then most importantly,
it doesn't execute these lines of code.
So, no output, there's no output here.
Nothing comes out from that first part.
Now, it has a side effect of extending
Python, so there's this new thing,
"thing", that we can call.
So we call this calling or invoking.
So we've made one of these things,
now let's call the thing.
So we say thing().
And that's the syntax to
say go call the function.
Now we've been using functions,
print is a function, right?
print() parameter,
that's how print works.
Well, thing is a function,
thing(), but there just happens to
be no parameter in this because,
this is a really simple function.
So, what happens is,
def does nothing but remembers thing,
then says oh, let's go back and
run that thing, run those two lines.
So out come Hello and Fun.
And then it comes back down to here, runs
this print statement, so out comes Zip.
And then it says oh, run that code again.
So this is the don't repeat yourself part.
Run this, print, print, do it, again,
and now the program's done.
So it comes back here.
So one of the things about functions is
that Python, when it calls a function,
it kind of remembers
where to come back to.
It's like, okay, go up here.
Now I'm done, where do I go back to?
Oh, I remembered to come back to here,
so then do this.
Okay, here's my coming back place,
run up again,
run, go back to the coming back place.
So it's like it sort of pauses this code, pause
here, run this, and then resume there.
So it's like jump and then come back.
So we've been using functions all along,
things like print, input, type,
float, int. int and float do conversions,
type tells us what kind of a thing
something is, print prints stuff out and
input reads stuff from the user.
And then later we'll talk about functions
that we're going to make and then use.
As we extend Python by building functions,
we can think of them as like
new reserves or function names.
And so the naming conventions for function
names is the same as for variables and
you want to avoid things like reserved
words and other things like that.
So, function's some bit of reusable code,
we define a function using a def
keyword, and then we call or invoke.
We mostly say call but
I think of invoke as a little clearer.
Like invoke this function,
do it right, here with a function name,
parentheses, and then optional arguments.
So here's a function that we haven't
played with yet called the max function.
It's also another one of
Python's built-in functions and
this is an example of an argument.
We're passing in a string and we're asking
max finds the largest of something and
in this case it's going to scan through
this string and find the largest letter.
And it decides that w
is the largest letter.
Apparently lowercase letters
are bigger than uppercase letters.
And then it does what is called
a return and it gives us back
the thing that it's like, you asked
me to find this and now I found a w.
Here you go and
then that w gets assigned into big.
So if we do a min,
which is a different function,
we pass it in the same Hello world,
it looks for the smallest thing.
And for some reason,
space is the smallest thing.
So this space is what gets
sent back to tiny, and
there's a space right there and
away we go.
So, at some level you can
think of this max function as
a chunk of code that's been
built into Python before.
We are passing in an argument,
which is a string.
There's some code inside here that runs,
reads through the argument, comes in and
then it reads through and looks at that
stuff, reads some stuff, and
then sends us back the answer,
which is w, which is
this is called return.
It returns us something.
And then that w, so you think it's working
on this side of this assignment statement.
The w is the residual value,
once the max function is executed.
And then that then is assigned into big,
and so big has the letter w in it.
So the kinds of things that we've been
playing with so far are type conversions.
And so here it goes Python,
it's looking at what to print.
It's like oh, I've got an expression here but
wait a sec, I want to do this but
wait, oh, I've got to call a function.
So there's a little float sitting here,
a little code for float.
We pass a 99 in and we get back 99.0 and
then that 99.0 divided
by 100 gives us 0.99.
So it sort of pauses its calculation and
then it goes and
runs this float code and then comes back.
Now we're going to make a variable i,
42, say what kind of thing is it,
it's an integer.
Now, what we're going to do is we're
going to pass this integer into that same
float code, 42 into the same float code,
and out's going to come 42.0 and that's
going to replace this in the function and
that's going to be assigned into f.
And so surprise, surprise, we have 42 in f,
we ask what kind of a thing it is.
And then,
it's going to do this calculation.
Remember, it's going to do
the multiplication first,
the division second, so
it's looking at 2 times float.
Oh, hold on for a second.
Stop for a moment.
We now have to run float,
which means we take this 3,
we pass it into the float code.
The float sends us back,
in this case, 3.0 which replaces
this in the function as 3.0.
And then we end up with this
calculation of 2 times 3.0 or 6.0 and
then on and on and
on the rest of it finishes.
So you think of these function calls
as suspending what we're doing,
just for a brief instant,
we're going to suspend that and then wait,
and then the function will give us
something back to replace that, okay?
String conversions as well.
We have been using int and
float to do things like read things in
because input is a function but
it always gives us back a string.
And it gives us a string. We might use this
as a number. So the string 1-2-3 is
not the same as 123. That is a string.
And if we do something crazy like add 1 to it,
Boom, we get a traceback because
we can't concatenate string and
integer just cause they're the wrong type.
But if we take this same 123, and here's
a little code called the int function.
We pass sval in,
which is 1-2-3 the string and
we get back 123 the integer then that
replaces this in the function and
then 123 integer is assigned into ival.
And we say we hey, what kind of thing is ival?
Well, it's an integer.
We can add 1 to it and get 124.
And we just came from a previous chapter,
if we happened to call an int and
we pass hello bob,
in, I should have used a different color.
We pass hello bob in.
This code blows up.
[SOUND] And it says oh, traceback,
and that blew up.
So even a function can blow up.
And you know what?
Our code blows up.
So the function blows up and away we go.
So up next we're going to stop
using built-in functions and
actually define and
use a few functions of our own.